01.6.4 Processed cheese:
Product with a very long shelf life obtained by melting and emulsifying cheese. Includes products manufactured by  heating  and  emulsifying  mixtures  of  cheese,  milkfat,  milk  protein,  milk  powder,  and  water  in  different amounts. Products may contain other added ingredients, such as aromas, seasonings and fruit, vegetables and/or meat. Product may be spreadable or cut into slices and pieces. 26  The term 'processed' does not mean cutting, grating, shredding, etc. of cheese. Cheese treated by these mechanical processes are included under food category 01.6.2 (Ripened cheese).
01.6.4.1 Plain processed cheese:
Processed cheese product that does not contain added flavours, seasonings, fruit, vegetables and/or meat. Examples include: American cheese, requeson.
01.6.4.2 Flavoured processed cheese, including containing fruit, vegetables, meat, etc.:
Processed cheese product that contains added flavours, seasonings, fruit, vegetables and/or meat. Examples include: neufchatel cheese spread with vegetables, pepper jack cheese, cheddar cheese spread with wine, and cheese balls (formed processed cheese coated in nuts, herbs or spices).
01.6.5 Cheese analogues:
Products that look like cheese, but  in which milkfat has been  partly or completely replaced by other fats. Includes imitation cheese, imitation cheese mixes, and imitation cheese powders.
01.6.6 Whey protein cheese:
Product containing the protein extracted from the whey component of milk. These products are principally made by coagulation of whey proteins. 25  Example: ricotta cheese. Different from whey cheese (01.6.3).
01.7 Dairy-based desserts (e.g. pudding, fruit or flavoured yoghurt):
Includes ready-to-eat flavoured dairy dessert products and dessert mixes. Includes frozen dairy confections and novelties, and dairy-based fillings. Includes flavoured yoghurt (a milk product obtained by fermentation of milk and milk products to which flavours and ingredients (e.g. fruit, cocoa, coffee) have been added) that may or may not be heat-treated after fermentation. 27  Other examples include: ice cream (frozen dessert that may contain whole milk, skim milk products, cream or butter, sugar, vegetable oil, egg products, and fruit, cocoa, or coffee), ice milk (product similar to ice cream with reduced whole or skim milk content, or made with nonfat milk), jellied milk, frozen flavoured yoghurt, junket (sweet custard-like dessert made from flavoured milk set with rennet), dulce  de  leche  (cooked  milk  with  sugar  and  added  ingredients  such  as  coconut  or chocolate),butterscotch pudding and chocolate mousse. Includes traditional milk-based sweets prepared from milk concentrated partially, from khoa (cow or buffalo milk concentrated by boiling), or chhena (cow or buffalo milk, heat coagulated aided by acids like citric acid, lactic acid, malic acid, etc), sugar or synthetic sweetener, and other ingredients (e.g. maida (refined wheat flour), flavours and colours (e.g. peda , burfee ,  milk cake, gulab jamun , rasgulla , rasmalai , basundi ). These products are different from those in food category 03.0 (edible ices, including sherbet and sorbet) in that the foods in category 01.7 are dairy-based, while those in 03.0 are water-based and contain no dairy ingredients.
01.8 Whey and whey products, excluding whey cheeses:
Includes a variety of whey-based products in liquid and powdered forms.
01.8.1 Liquid whey and whey products, excluding whey cheeses:
Whey is the fluid separated from the curd after coagulation of milk, cream, skimmed milk or buttermilk with milk coagulating enzymes during the manufacture of cheese, casein or similar products. Acid whey is obtained after the  coagulation  of  milk,  cream,  skimmed  milk  or  buttermilk,  mainly  with  acids  of  the  type  used  for  the manufacture of fresh cheese. 28
01.8.2 Dried whey and whey products, excluding whey cheeses:
Whey powders are prepared by spray- or roller-drying whey or acid whey from which the major portion of the milkfat has been removed. 28
02.0 Fats and oils, and fat emulsions:
Includes all fat-based products that are derived from vegetable, animal or marine sources, or their mixtures.
26 Food Chemistry , H.-D. Belitz & W. Grosch, Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg, 1987, pp. 400.
27 Standard for Fermented Milks (CODEX STAN 243-2003).
28 Standard for Whey Powders (CODEX STAN 289-1995).
02.1 Fats and oils essentially free from water:
Edible fats and oils are foods composed mainly of triglycerides of fatty acids from vegetable, animal or marine sources. 29
02.1.1 Butter oil, anhydrous milkfat, ghee:
The milkfat products anhydrous milkfat, anhydrous butter oil and butter oil are products derived exclusively from milk and/or products obtained from milk by a process that almost completely removes water and non-fat solids. Ghee is a product obtained exclusively from milk, cream or butter by a process that almost completely removes water and non-fat solids; it has a specially developed flavour and physical structure. 30
02.1.2 Vegetable oils and fats:
Edible fats and oils obtained from edible plant sources. Products may be from a single plant source or marketed and used as blended oils that are generally designated as edible, cooking, frying, table or salad oils. 31  Virgin oils are obtained by mechanical means (e.g. pressing or expelling), with application of heat only so as not to alter the natural composition of the oil. Virgin oils are suitable for consumption in the natural state. Cold pressed oils  are  obtained  by  mechanical  means  without  application  of  heat. 29, 32  Examples  include:  virgin  olive  oil, cottonseed oil, peanut oil, and vanaspati.
02.1.3 Lard, tallow, fish oil, and other animal fats:
All animal fats and oils should be derived from animals in good health at the time of slaughter and intended for human consumption. Lard is fat rendered from the fatty tissue of swine. Edible beef fat is obtained from fresh bovine  fatty  tissue  covering  the  abdominal  cavity  and  surrounding  the  kidney  and  heart,  and  from  other compact, undamaged fat tissues. Such fresh fat obtained at the time of slaughter is the 'killing fat.' Prime beef fat  (premiere  jus  or  oleo  stock)  is  obtained  by  low-heat  rendering  (50-55 o C)  of  killing  fat  and  selected  fat trimmings (cutting fat). Secunda beef fat is a product with typical beef fat odour and taste obtained by rendering (60-65 o C) and purifying beef fat. Rendered pork fat is fat obtained from the tissue and bones of swine. Edible tallow (dripping) is produced by the rendering of fatty tissue (excluding trimmings and cutting fat), attached muscles and bones of bovine animals or sheep. Fish oils are derived from suitable sources such as herring, sardines, sprat, and anchovies. 33,34  Other examples include: tallow and partially defatted beef or pork fatty tissue.
02.2 Fat emulsions mainly of type water-in-oil:
Include all emulsified products excluding fat-based counterparts of dairy products and dairy desserts.
02.2.1 Butter:
Butter is a fatty product consisting of a primarily water-in-oil emulsion derived exclusively from milk and/or products obtained from milk. 35
02.2.2 Fat spreads, dairy fat spreads and blended spreads:
Includes  fat  spreads  (emulsions  principally  of  the  type  water  and  edible  fats  and  oils),  dairy  fat  spreads (emulsions  principally  of  the  type  water-in-milkfat),  and  blended  spreads  (fat  spreads  blended  with  higher amounts  of  milkfat). 36  Examples  include  margarine  (a  spreadable  or  fluid  water-in-oil  emulsion  produced mainly from edible fats and oils); products derived from butter (e.g. 'butterine,' a spreadable butter blend with vegetable oils) 37  blends of butter and margarine; and minarine (a spreadable water-in-oil emulsion produced principally from water and edible fats and oils that are not solely derived from milk). Also includes reduced fatbased products derived from milkfat or from animal or vegetable fats, including reduced-fat counterparts of butter, margarine, and their mixtures (e.g. three-quarter fat butter, three-quarter fat margarine, or three-quarter fat butter-margarine blends).
29 General Standard for Edible Fats and Oils Not Covered by Individual Standards (CODEX STAN 19-1981).
30 Standard for Milkfat Products (CODEX STAN 280-1973).
31 Food Chemistry
, H.-D. Belitz & W. Grosch, Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg, 1987, pp. 472-476.
32 Standard for Olive Oils and Olive Pomace Oils (CODEX STAN 33-1981); and Standard for Named Vegetable Oils (CODEX STAN 210-1999).
33 Food Chemistry , H.-D. Belitz & W. Grosch, Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg, 1987, pp. 472-476.
34 Standard for Named Animal Fats (CODEX STAN 211-1999).
35 Standard for Butter (CODEX STAN 279-1971).
36 Standard  for  Dairy  Fat  Spreads (CODEX  STAN  253-2006);  and Standard  for  Fat  Spreads  and  Blended  Spreads (CODEX STAN 256-2007).
37 Food Chemistry , H.-D. Belitz & W. Grosch, Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg, 1987, p. 395.
02.3  Fat  emulsions  mainly  of  type  oil-in-water,  including  mixed  and/or  flavoured  products  based  on  fat emulsions:
Includes fat-based counterparts of dairy-based foods excluding dessert products. The fat portion of these products are derived from sources other than milkfat (e.g. vegetable fats and oils). Examples include: imitation milk (a fat-substituted milk produced from non-fat milk solids by addition of vegetable fats (coconut, safflower or corn oil)), 13 non-dairy whipped cream; non-dairy toppings; and vegetable cream. Mayonnaise is included in food category 12.6.1.
02.4 Fat-based desserts excluding dairy-based dessert products of food category 01.7:
Includes fat-based counterparts of dairy-based desserts, which are found in category 01.7. Includes ready-toeat products and their mixes. Also includes non-dairy fillings for desserts. An example is an ice cream-like product made with vegetable fats.
03.0 Edible ices, including sherbet and sorbet:
This category includes water-based frozen desserts, confections and novelties, such as fruit sorbet, 'Italian'style ice, and flavoured ice. Frozen desserts containing primarily dairy ingredients are included in food category 01.7.
04.0 Fruits and vegetables (including mushrooms and fungi, roots and tubers, pulses and legumes, and aloe vera), seaweeds, and nuts and seeds:
This major category is divided into two categories: 04.1(Fruit) and 04.2 (Vegetables (including mushrooms and fungi, roots and tubers, pulses and legumes, and aloe vera), seaweeds, and nuts and seeds). Each of these categories is further divided into sub-categories for fresh and processed products.
04.1 Fruit:
Includes all fresh (04.1.1) and processed (04.1.2) products.
04.1.1 Fresh fruit:
Fresh fruit is generally free of additives. However, fresh fruit that is coated or cut or peeled for presentation to the consumer may contain additives.
04.1.1.1 Untreated fresh fruit:
Raw fruit presented fresh from harvest.
04.1.1.2 Surface-treated fresh fruit:
The surfaces of certain fresh fruit are coated with glazes or waxes or are treated with other food additives that act as protective coatings and/or help to preserve the freshness and quality of the fruit. Examples include apples, oranges, dates, and longans.
04.1.1.3 Peeled or cut fresh fruit:
Fresh fruit that is cut or peeled and presented to the consumer, e.g. in a fruit salad. Includes fresh shredded or flaked coconut.
04.1.2 Processed fruit:
Includes all forms of processing other than peeling, cutting and surface treating fresh fruit.
04.1.2.1 Frozen fruit:
Fruit that may or may not be blanched prior to freezing. The product may be frozen in a juice or sugar syrup. 38 Examples include frozen fruit salad and frozen strawberries.
04.1.2.2 Dried fruit:
Fruit  from  which  water  is  removed  to  prevent  microbial  growth. 38   Includes  dried  fruit  leathers  (fruit  rolls) prepared by drying fruit purees. Examples include dried apple slices, raisins, dried shredded or flaked coconut, and prunes.
38 Food Chemistry , H.-D. Belitz & W. Grosch, Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg, 1987, pp. 613-617.
04.1.2.3 Fruit in vinegar, oil, or brine:
Includes  pickled  products  such  as  pickled  plums,  mango  pickles,  lime  pickles,  pickled  gooseberries,  and pickled watermelon rind. Oriental pickled ('cured' or 'preserved') fruit products are sometimes referred to as 'candied' fruit. 39  These are not the candied fruit products of category 04.1.2.7 (i.e. dried, sugar coated fruit).
04.1.2.4 Canned or bottled (pasteurized) fruit:
Fully preserved product in which fresh fruit is cleaned and placed in cans or jars with natural juice or sugar syrup (including artificially sweetened syrup) and heat-sterilized or pasteurized. 38  Includes products processed in retort pouches. Examples include: canned fruit salad, and applesauce in jars.
04.1.2.5 Jams, jellies, marmalades:
Jams, preserves and conserves are thick, spreadable products prepared by boiling whole fruit or pieces of fruit, fruit pulp or puree, with or without fruit juice or concentrated fruit juice, and sugar to thicken, and to which pectin and fruit pieces may be added. Jelly is a clear spreadable product prepared similarly to jam, except that it is has a smoother consistency and does not contain fruit pieces. Marmalade is a thick spreadable fruit slurry prepared from whole fruit, fruit pulp or puree (usually citrus), and boiled with sugar to thicken, to which pectin and fruit pieces and fruit peel pieces may be added. 38,40   Includes dietetic counterparts made with non-nutritive high-intensity sweeteners. Examples include: orange marmalade, grape jelly, and strawberry jam.
04.1.2.6 Fruit-based spreads (e.g. chutney) excluding products of food category 04.1.2.5:
Includes all other fruit-based spreads, such as apple butter and lemon curd. Also includes condiment-type fruit products such as mango chutney and raisin chutney.
04.1.2.7 Candied fruit:
Includes glazed fruits (fruit treated with a sugar solution and dried), candied fruit (dried glazed fruit immersed in a sugar solution and dried so that the fruit is covered by a candy-like sugar shell), and crystallized fruit is prepared  (dried  glazed  fruit  rolled  in  icing  or  granulated  sugar  and  dried). 38   Examples  include:  cocktail (maraschino) cherries, candied citrus peel, candied citrons (e.g. used in holiday fruitcakes), and mostarda di frutta.
04.1.2.8 Fruit preparations, including pulp, purees, fruit toppings and coconut milk:
Fruit pulp is not usually intended for direct consumption. It is a slurry of lightly steamed and strained fresh fruit, with or without added preservatives.   Fruit puree (e.g. mango puree, prune puree) is produced in the same way, but has a smoother, finer texture, and may be used as fillings for pastries, but is not limited to this use. Fruit sauce  (e.g.  pineapple  sauce  or  strawberry  sauce)  is  made  from  boiled  fruit  pulp  with  or  without  added sweeteners and may contain fruit pieces. Fruit sauce may be used as toppings for fine bakery wares and ice cream sundaes. Fruit syrup (e.g. blueberry syrup) is a more liquid form of fruit sauce that may be used as a topping  e.g.  for  pancakes. 38 Non-fruit  toppings  are  included  in  category  05.4  (sugar-  and  chocolate-based toppings) and sugar syrups (e.g. maple syrup) are included in category 11.4. Coconut milk and coconut cream are products prepared using a significant amount of separated, whole, disintegrated macerated or comminuted fresh  endosperm  (kernel)  of  coconut  palm  and  expelled,  where  most  filterable  fibers  and  residues  are excluded, with or without coconut water, and/or with additional water. Coconut milk and coconut cream are treated  by  heat  pasteurization,  sterilization  or  ultrahigh  temperature  (UHT)  processes.  Coconut  milk  and coconut cream may also be produced in concentrated or skim (or 'light') forms. 41  Examples of traditional foods in  this  sub-category are: tamarind concentrate (clean extract of tamarind fruit with not less than 65% total soluble  solids),  tamarind  powder  (tamarind  paste  mixed  with  tapioca  starch),  tamarind  toffee  (mixture  of tamarind pulp, sugar, milk solids, antioxidants, flavours, stabilizers and preservatives), and fruit bars (a mixture of fruit (mango, pineapple, or guava) pulp mixed with sugar, flavours and preservatives, dried into a sheet).
04.1.2.9 Fruit-based desserts, incl. fruit-flavoured water-based desserts:
Includes  the  ready-to-eat  products  and  mixes.  Includes  fruit-flavoured  gelatine,  rote  gruze,  frutgrod,  fruit compote,  nata  de  coco,  and mitsumame (gelatine-like  dessert  of  agar  jelly,  fruit  pieces  and  syrup).  This category does not include fine bakery wares containing fruit (categories 07.2.1 and 07.2.2), fruit-flavoured edible ices (category 03.0), or fruit-containing frozen dairy desserts (category 01.7).
39 Asian Foods: Science and Technology , C.Y.W. Ang, K.S. Liu, & Y.-W. Huang, Eds., Chapter 10: Fruit Products, J.X. Shi & B.S. Luh, Technomic Publishing Co., Lancaster PA 1999, p. 290.
40 Standard for Jams, Jellies and Marmalades (CODEX STAN 296-2009).
41 Standard for Aqueous Coconut Products - Coconut Milk and Coconut Cream (CODEX STAN 240-2003).
04.1.2.10 Fermented fruit products:
Type  of  pickled  product  produced  by  preservation  in  salt  by  lactic  acid  fermentation.  Examples  include: fermented plums.
04.1.2.11 Fruit fillings for pastries:
Includes the ready-to-eat products and mixes. Includes all type of fillings excluding purees (category 04.1.2.8). These fillings usually include whole fruit or fruit pieces. Examples include: cherry pie filling and raisin filling for oatmeal cookies.
04.1.2.12 Cooked fruit:
Fruit  that  is  steamed,  boiled,  baked,  or  fried,  with  or  without  a  coating,  for  presentation  to  the  consumer. Examples include: baked apples, fried apple rings, and peach dumplings (baked peaches with a sweet dough covering).
04.2 Vegetables (including mushrooms and fungi, roots and tubers, pulses and legumes, and aloe vera), seaweeds, and nuts and seeds:
Includes all fresh (04.2.1) and processed (04.2.2) products.
04.2.1 Fresh vegetables (including mushrooms and fungi, roots and tubers, pulses and legumes, and aloe vera), seaweeds, and nuts and seeds:
Fresh vegetables are generally free of additives. However, fresh vegetables that are coated or cut or peeled for presentation to the consumer may contain additives.
04.2.1.1 Untreated fresh vegetables (including mushrooms and fungi, roots and tubers, pulses and legumes (including soybeans), and aloe vera), seaweeds, and nuts and seeds:
Raw vegetables presented fresh from harvest.
04.2.1.2  Surface-treated  fresh  vegetables  (including  mushrooms  and  fungi,  roots  and  tubers,  pulses  and legumes, and aloe vera), seaweeds, and nuts and seeds:
The  surfaces  of  certain  fresh  vegetables  are  coated  with  glazes  or  waxes  or  are  treated  with  other  food additives that act as protective coatings and/or help to preserve the freshness and quality of the vegetable. Examples include: avocados, cucumbers, green peppers and pistachio nuts.
04.2.1.3 Peeled, cut or shredded fresh vegetables (including mushrooms and fungi, roots and tubers, pulses and legumes, and aloe vera), seaweeds, and nuts and seeds:
Fresh vegetables, e.g. peeled raw potatoes, that are presented to the consumer to be cooked at home (e.g. in the preparation of hash brown potatoes).
04.2.2 Processed vegetables (including mushrooms and fungi, roots and tubers, pulses and legumes, and aloe vera), seaweeds, and nuts and seeds:
Includes all forms of processing other than peeling, cutting and surface treating fresh vegetables.
04.2.2.1 Frozen vegetables (including mushrooms and fungi, roots and tubers, pulses and legumes, and aloe vera), seaweeds, and nuts and seeds:
Fresh  vegetables  are  usually  blanched  and  frozen. 42 Examples  include:  quick-frozen  corn,  quick-frozen French-fried potatoes, quick frozen peas, and quick frozen whole processed tomatoes.
04.2.2.2 Dried vegetables (including mushrooms and fungi, roots and tubers, pulses and legumes, and aloe vera), seaweeds, and nuts and seeds:
Products in which the natural water content has been reduced below that critical for growth for microorganisms without affecting the important nutrients. The product may or may not be intended for rehydration prior to consumption. Includes vegetable powders that are obtained from drying the juice, such as tomato powder and beet powder. 42  Examples include: dried potato flakes and dried lentil. Examples of Oriental dried products include: dried sea tangle (kelp; kombu ), dried sea tangle with seasoning ( shio-kombu ), dried seaweed ( tororokombu ), dried gourd strips ( kampyo ), dried laver ( nori ), and dried laminariales ( wakame ).
42 Food Chemistry , H.-D. Belitz & W. Grosch, Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg, 1987, pp. 572-576.