06.8.8 Other soybean protein products
Other products from soybeans composed mainly of soybean protein such as extruded, textured, concentrated, and isolated soybean protein.
07.0 Bakery wares:
Includes categories for bread and ordinary bakery wares (07.1) and for sweet, salty and savoury fine bakery wares (07.2).
07.1 Bread and ordinary bakery wares and mixes:
Includes all types of non-sweet bakery products and bread-derived products.
07.1.1 Breads and rolls:
Includes yeast-leavened and specialty breads and soda bread.
07.1.1.1 Yeast-leavened breads and specialty breads:
Includes all types of non-sweet bakery products and bread-derived products. Examples include: white bread, rye bread, pumpernickel bread, raisin bread, whole wheat bread, pain courant francais, malt bread, hamburger rolls, whole wheat rolls, and milk rolls.
07.1.1.2 Soda breads:
Includes soda breads.
07.1.2 Crackers, excluding sweet crackers:
The term 'cracker' refers to a thin, crisp wafer, usually of unsweetened dough. Flavoured crackers (e.g. cheese flavoured) that are consumed as snacks are in 15.1. Examples include: soda crackers, rye crisps, and matzohs.
07.1.3 Other ordinary bakery products (e.g. bagels, pita, English muffins):
Includes all other ordinary bakery wares, such as cornbread and biscuits. The term 'biscuit' in this category refers to a small cake of shortened bread, leavened with baking powder or baking soda. It does not refer to the British 'biscuit,' which is a 'cookie' or 'sweet cracker' included in category 07.2.1.
07.1.4 Bread-type products, including bread stuffing and bread crumbs:
Includes bread-based products such as croutons, bread stuffing and stuffing mixes, and prepared doughs (e.g. for biscuits). Bread mixes are included in category 07.1.6.
07.1.5 Steamed breads and buns:
Oriental-style leavened wheat or rice products that are cooked in a steamer. Products may be made with or without filling. In China, products without filling are called steamed bread ( mantou ), and those with filling are called  steamed  buns  ( baozi or bao ).  Twisted  rolls  of  various  shapes  ( huajuan )  may  also  be  prepared. 60 Examples include: filled dumplings and steamed bun with meat, jam or other filling ( manjyu ).
07.1.6 Mixes for bread and ordinary bakery wares:
Includes all the mixes containing the dry ingredients to which wet ingredients (e.g. water, milk, oil, butter, eggs) are added to prepare a dough for baked goods from food categories 07.1.1 to 07.1.5. Examples include: French bread mix, tin bread mix, panettone mix, ciabatta mix, among others. Mixes for fine bakery wares (e.g. cakes, cookies, pancakes) are found in category 07.2.3.
07.2 Fine bakery wares (sweet, salty, savoury) and mixes:
Includes sub-categories for ready-to-eat products (07.2.1 and 07.2.2) as well as mixes (07.2.3) for preparing fine baked goods.
07.2.1 Cakes, cookies and pies (e.g. fruit-filled or custard types):
The term 'sweet cracker' or 'sweet biscuit' used in this category refers to a cookie-like product that may be eaten as a dessert. Examples include: butter cake, cheesecake, fruit-filled cereal bars, pound cake (including kasutera ), moist cake (type of starchy dessert ( namagashi )), western cakes, moon cakes, sponge cake, fruitfilled pies (e.g. apple pie), oatmeal cookies, sugar cookies and British 'biscuits' (cookies or sweet crackers).
60 Asian Foods: Science and Technology , C.Y.W. Ang, K.S. Liu, & Y.-W. Huang, Eds., Chapter 4: Wheat Products: 2. Breads, Cakes, Cookies, Pastries, and Dumplings, S. Huang, Technomic Publishing Co., Lancaster PA 1999, pp. 7273.
07.2.2 Other fine bakery products (e.g. doughnuts, sweet rolls, scones, and muffins):
Includes products that may be eaten as a dessert or as breakfast. Examples include: pancakes, waffles, filled sweet buns ( anpan ), Danish pastry, wafers or cones for ice cream, flour confectionery, and trifles.
07.2.3 Mixes for fine bakery wares (e.g. cakes, pancakes):
Mixes containing the dry ingredients to which wet ingredients (e.g. water, milk, oil, butter, eggs) are added to prepare a dough for fine baked goods. Examples include: cake mix, flour confectionery mix, pancake mix, pie mix, and waffle mix. Prepared dough is found in category 07.1.4. Mixes for ordinary bakery wares (e.g. bread) is found in category 07.1.6.
08.0 Meat and meat products, including poultry and game:
This category includes all types of meat, poultry, and game products, in pieces and cuts or comminuted, fresh (08.1) and processed (08.2 and 08.3).
08.1 Fresh meat, poultry and game:
Fresh products are usually free of additives. However, in certain circumstances, additives are necessary. For example, colours are used for certification stamps on the surfaces of fresh cuts of meat, and are indicated in the  Food  Category  System  with  a  notation  for  'stamping,  marking  or  branding  the  product.'  Additionally, coatings, such as glazes and spice rubs, may be applied to meat products prior to marketing to the consumer (e.g. glazed ham, and barbecued chicken). In the Food Category System, this is indicated with a notation for 'use as a glaze or coating (surface treatment).' It should be noted that the coatings marketed per se are included in food categories 04.1.2.8 (fruit-based glazes, e.g. for ham) and 12.2 (spice rubs).
08.1.1 Fresh meat, poultry and game, whole pieces or cuts:
Untreated raw meat, poultry and game carcasses and cuts. Examples include: beef, hog and pork carcasses; fresh beef blood; fresh whole chickens and chicken parts; fresh beef cuts (e.g. steaks); beef organs (e.g. heart, kidney); fresh tripe; and pork chops.
08.1.2 Fresh meat, poultry and game, comminuted:
Untreated raw comminuted or mechanically deboned meat, poultry and game. Examples include: fresh beef (hamburger) patties; boerewors; fresh breakfast sausages; gehakt (chopped meat); loganiza (fresh, uncured sausage); fresh meatballs; mechanically deboned, ground and formed poultry pieces (with or without breading or coating); and fresh sausages (e.g. beef, Italian, and pork).
08.2 Processed meat, poultry, and game products in whole pieces or cuts:
Includes various treatments for non-heat treated meat cuts (08.2.1) and heat-treated meat cuts (08.3.2).
08.2.1 Non-heat treated processed meat, poultry and game products in whole pieces or cuts:
This category describes several treatment methods (e.g. curing, salting, drying, pickling) that preserve and extend the shelf life of meats.
08.2.1.1  Cured  (including  salted)  non-heat  treated  processed  meat,  poultry,  and  game  products  in  whole pieces or cuts:
Salted products are treated with sodium chloride. Dry cured (dry pickled) products are prepared by rubbing salt directly on the meat surface. Wet pickle cured products are prepared by submerging the meat in a brine solution. Pump cured products are prepared by injecting brine into the meat. Curing may also be achieved by addition of additives. Smoked products are also included here. 61  Examples include: bacon (cured, dry-cured, immersion-cured,  pump-cured);  side  bacon;  corned  beef;  marinated  beef;  and  different  types  of  Oriental pickled products: miso-pickled meat ( miso-zuke ), koji -pickled meat ( koji-zuke ), and soy sauce-pickled meat ( shoyu-zuke ).
08.2.1.2 Cured (including salted) and dried non-heat treated processed meat, poultry, and game products in whole pieces or cuts:
The meat cuts may be cured or salted as described for category 08.2.1.1, and then dried, or they may only be dried. Drying is achieved either in hot air or in vacuum. 61  Examples include: dried salt pork, dehydrated meat, stuffed loin, Iberian ham, and prosciutto-type ham.
61 Food Chemistry , H.-D. Belitz & W. Grosch, Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg, 1987, pp. 439-445.
08.2.1.3 Fermented non-heat treated processed meat, poultry, and game products in whole pieces or cuts:
Fermented products are a type of pickled product produced by the action of lactic acid bacteria in the presence of salt. Examples include: potted beef and pickled (fermented) pig's feet.
08.2.2 Heat-treated processed meat, poultry, and game products in whole pieces or cuts:
Includes cooked (including cured and cooked, and dried and cooked), heat-treated (including sterilized) and canned meat cuts. Examples include: cured, cooked ham; cured, cooked pork shoulder; canned chicken meat; and meat pieces boiled in soy sauce ( tsukudani ).
08.2.3 Frozen processed meat, poultry, and game products in whole pieces or cuts:
Includes raw and cooked meat cuts that have been frozen. Examples include: frozen whole chickens, frozen chicken parts, and frozen beef steaks.
08.3 Processed comminuted meat, poultry, and game products:
Includes various treatments for non-heat treated products (08.3.1) and heat-treated products (08.3.2).
08.3.1 Non-heat treated processed comminuted meat, poultry, and game products:
This category describes several treatment methods (e.g. curing, salting, drying, pickling) that preserve and extend the shelf life of comminuted and mechanically deboned meat products.
08.3.1.1 Cured (including salted) non-heat treated processed comminuted meat, poultry, and game products:
Salted products are treated with sodium chloride. Dry cured (dry pickled) products are prepared by rubbing salt directly on the meat surface. Wet pickle cured products are prepared by submerging the meat in a brine solution. Pump cured products are prepared by injecting brine into the meat. Curing may also be achieved by addition of additives. Also includes smoked products. 61  Examples include: chorizos (spicy pork sausages), salami-type products, salchichon, tocino (fresh, cured sausage), pepperoni, and smoked sausage.
08.3.1.2 Cured (including salted) and dried non-heat treated processed comminuted meat, poultry, and game products:
The comminuted or mechanically deboned products may be cured or salted as described for category 08.3.1.1, and then dried, or they may only be dried. Drying is achieved either in hot air or in vacuum. 61  Examples include: pasturmas, dried sausages, cured and dried sausages, beef jerky, Chinese sausages (including traditional cured or smoked pork sausage), and sobrasada.
08.3.1.3 Fermented non-heat treated processed comminuted meat, poultry, and game products:
Fermented products are a type of pickled product produced by the action of lactic acid bacteria in the presence of salt. Certain types of sausages may be fermented.
08.3.2 Heat-treated processed comminuted meat, poultry, and game products:
Includes cooked (including cured and cooked, and dried and cooked), heat-treated (including sterilized) and canned comminuted products. Examples include: pre-grilled beef patties; foie gras and pates; brawn and head cheese; cooked, cured chopped meat; chopped meat boiled in soy sauce ( tsukudani ); canned corned beef; luncheon meats; meat pastes; cooked meat patties; cooked salami-type products; cooked meatballs; saucises de  strasbourg;  breakfast  sausages;  brown-and-serve  sausages;  and  terrines  (a  cooked  chopped  meat mixture).
08.3.3 Frozen processed comminuted meat, poultry, and game products:
Includes raw, partially cooked and fully cooked comminuted or mechanically deboned meat products that have been frozen. Examples include: frozen hamburger patties; frozen breaded or battered chicken fingers.
08.4 Edible casings (e.g. sausage casings):
Casings or tubing prepared from collagen, cellulose, or food-grade synthetic material or from natural sources (e.g. hog or sheep intestines) that contain the sausage mix. 61
09.0 Fish and fish products, including molluscs, crustaceans, and echinoderms:
This broad category is divided into categories for fresh fish (09.1) and various processed fish products (09.2 09.4).    This  category  includes  aquatic  vertebrates  (fish  and  aquatic  mammals  (e.g.  whales)),  aquatic invertebrates (e.g. jellyfish), as well as molluscs (e.g. clams, snails), crustaceans (e.g. shrimp, crab, lobster), and echinoderms (e.g. sea urchins, sea cucumbers).  Fish products may be treated with coatings, such as glazes and spice rubs, prior to marketing to the consumer (e.g. glazed frozen fish fillets). In the Food Category System, this is indicated with a notation for 'use as a glaze or coating (surface treatment).'
09.1 Fresh fish and fish products, including molluscs, crustaceans, and echinoderms:
The term 'fresh' refers to fish and fish products that are untreated except for refrigeration, storage on ice, or freezing upon catching at sea or in lakes or other bodies of water in order to prevent decomposition and spoilage. 62
091.1. Fresh fish:
Includes fresh whale meat, cod, salmon, trout, etc.; and fresh fish roe.
09.1.2 Fresh molluscs, crustaceans and echinoderms:
Includes fresh shrimp, clams, crabs, lobster, snails, etc.
09.2 Processed fish and fish products, including molluscs, crustaceans, and echinoderms:
This category refers to fish products that are frozen and may require further cooking, as well as ready-to-eat cooked, smoked, dried, fermented, and salted products.
09.2.1 Frozen fish, fish fillets, and fish products, including molluscs, crustaceans, and echinoderms:
Fresh, including partially cooked, fish subjected to freezing or quick-freezing at sea and on land for further processing. 62  Examples include: frozen or deep frozen clams, cod fillets, crab, finfish, haddock, hake, lobster, minced fish, prawns and shrimp; frozen fish roe; frozen surimi; and frozen whale meat.
09.2.2 Frozen battered fish, fish fillets and fish products, including molluscs, crustaceans, and echinoderms:
Uncooked product prepared from fish or fish  portions, with dressing in eggs and bread crumbs or  batter. Examples include: frozen raw breaded or batter-coated shrimp; and frozen or quick-frozen breaded or battercoated fish fillets, fish portions and fish sticks (fish fingers). 63
09.2.3 Frozen minced and creamed fish products, including molluscs, crustaceans, and echinoderms:
Uncooked product prepared from minced fish pieces in cream-type sauce.
09.2.4 Cooked and/or fried fish and fish products, including molluscs, crustaceans, and echinoderms:
Includes all ready-to-eat cooked products as described in the sub-categories.
09.2.4.1 Cooked fish and fish products:
Cooked products include steamed, boiled or any other cooking method except frying (see 09.2.4.3). The fish may be whole, in portions or comminuted.  Examples include: fish sausage; cooked fish products boiled down in  soy  sauce  ( tsukudani );  cooked  surimi  product  ( kamaboko );  crab-flavoured  cooked kamaboko product ( kanikama ); cooked fish roe; cooked surimi; cooked, tube-shaped surimi product ( chikuwa ); and cooked fish and lobster paste (surimi-like products. Other fish paste (Oriental type) is found in 09.3.4.
09.2.4.2 Cooked molluscs, crustaceans, and echinoderms:
Cooked products include steamed, boiled or any other cooking method except frying (see 09.2.4.3). Examples include: cooked crangon crangon and crangon vulgaris (brown shrimp; cooked shrimp, clams and crabs.
09.2.4.3 Fried fish and fish products, including molluscs, crustaceans, and echinoderms:
Ready-to-eat products prepared from fish or fish portions, with or without further dressing in eggs and bread crumbs or batter, that are fried, baked, roasted or barbecued, and then packaged or canned with or without sauce or oil. 62  Examples include: ready-to-eat fried surimi, fried calamari, and fried soft-shell crabs.
09.2.5 Smoked, dried, fermented, and/or salted fish and fish products, including molluscs, crustaceans, and echinoderms:
Smoked fish are usually prepared from fresh deep frozen or frozen fish that are dried directly or after boiling, with or without salting, by exposing the fish to freshly-generated sawdust smoke. Dried fish are prepared by exposing the fish to sunlight or drying directly or after boiling in a special installation; the fish may be salted prior to drying. Salted fish are either rubbed with salt or placed in a salt solution.  This manufacturing process is different from that described in food category 09.3 for marinated and pickled fish.  Cured fish is prepared by salting  and  then  smoking  fish. 62   Examples  include:  salted  anchovies,  shrimp,  and  shad;  smoked  chub, cuttlefish and octopus; fish ham; dried and salted species of the Gadidae species; smoked or salted fish paste and fish roe; cured and smoked sablefish, shad, and salmon; dried shellfish, dried bonito ( katsuobushi ), and boiled, dried fish ( niboshi ).
62 Food Chemistry , H.-D. Belitz & W. Grosch, Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg, 1987, pp. 464-468.
63 Standard for Quick Frozen Fish Sticks (Fish Fingers), Fish Portions and Fish Fillets - Breaded and in Batter (CODEX STAN 166-1989).
09.3 Semi-preserved fish and fish products, including molluscs, crustaceans, and echinoderms:
Includes products treated by methods such as marinating, pickling and partial cooking that have a limited shelf life.
09.3.1 Fish and fish products, including molluscs, crustaceans, and echinoderms, marinated and/or in jelly:
Marinated products are manufactured by soaking the fish in vinegar or wine with or without added salt and spices. They are packaged in jars or cans and have a limited shelf life. Products in jelly may be manufactured by  tenderizing  fish  products  by  cooking  or  steaming,  adding  vinegar  or  wine,  salt  and  preservatives,  and solidifying in a jelly. Examples include: 'rollmops' (a type of marinated herring), sea eel (dogfish) in jelly and fish aspic. 62
09.3.2 Fish and fish products, including molluscs, crustaceans, and echinoderms, pickled and/or in brine:
Pickled products are sometimes considered a type of marinated product. Pickling results from the treatment of the fish with a salt and vinegar or alcohol (e.g. wine) solution. 62  Examples include: different types of Oriental pickled products: koji -pickled fish ( koji-zuke ), lees-pickled fish ( kasu-zuke ), miso -pickled fish ( miso-zuke ), soy sauce-pickled fish ( shoyu-zuke ), and vinegar-pickled fish ( su-zuke ); pickled whale meat; and pickled herring and sprat.
09.3.3 Salmon substitutes, caviar, and other fish roe products:
Roe is usually produced by washing, salting and allowing to ripen until transparent. The roe is then packaged in glass or other suitable containers. The term 'caviar' refers only to the roe of the sturgeon species (e.g. beluga). Caviar substitutes are made of roe of various sea and freshwater fish (e.g. cod and herring) that are salted, spiced, dyed and may be treated with a preservative. 62  Examples include: salted salmon roe ( sujiko ), processed, salted salmon roe ( ikura ), cod roe, salted cod roe ( tarako ) and lumpfish caviar. Occasionally, roe may be pasteurized. In this case, it is included in food category 09.4, since it is a fully preserved product. Roe products that are frozen, cooked or smoked are included in category 09.2.1, 09.2.4.1, and 09.2.5, respectively; fresh fish roe is found in category 09.1.1.
09.3.4 Semi-preserved fish and fish products, including molluscs, crustaceans, and echinoderms (e.g. fish paste), excluding products of food categories 09.3.1 - 0.9.3.3:
Examples include fish or crustacean pates and traditional Oriental fish paste. The latter is produced from fresh fish or the residue from fish sauce production, which is combined with other ingredients such as wheat flour, bran, rice or soybeans. The product may be further fermented. 64  Cooked fish or crustacean pastes (surimi-like products) are found in 09.2.4.1 and 09.2.4.2, respectively.
09.4 Fully preserved, including canned or fermented fish and fish products, including molluscs, crustaceans, and echinoderms:
Products with extended shelf life, manufactured by pasteurizing or steam retorting and packaging in vacuumsealed air-tight containers to ensure sterility. Products may be packed in their own juice or in added oil or sauce. 62  This category excludes fully cooked products (see category 09.2.4). Examples include: canned tuna, clams, crab, fish roe and sardines; gefilte fish balls; and surimi (heat-pasteurized).
10.0 Eggs and egg products:
Includes fresh in-shell eggs (10.1), products that may substitute for fresh eggs (10.2) and other egg products (10.3 and 10.4).
10.1 Fresh eggs:
Fresh in-shell eggs are not expected to contain additives. However, colours may be used for decorating, dyeing or stamping the exterior surfaces of shell eggs. In the Food Category System, a notation for "for decoration, stamping, marking or branding the product (surface treatment) accommodates this.
10.2 Egg products:
Products that may be used as replacement for fresh eggs in recipes or as a food (e.g. omelette). They are produced from fresh eggs by either (i) mixing and purifying the whole egg; or (ii) separating the egg white and yolk,  and then mixing and purifying each separately. The purified whole egg, white or yolk is then further processed to produce liquid, frozen or dried eggs as described below. 65
64 Asian Foods: Science and Technology , C.Y.W. Ang, K.S. Liu, & Y.-W. Huang, Eds., Chapter 9: Traditional Oriental Seafood Products, Y.-W. Huang & C.-Y Huang, Technomic Publishing Co., Lancaster PA 1999, p. 264.
65 Food Chemistry , H.-D. Belitz & W. Grosch, Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg, 1987, pp. 411-414.